<html>
<body>
<div class="bk2"><h1><b>the<br/>
valor<br/>
of<br/>
cappen<br/>
varra</b></h1>
<h2><small>by ... <i>POUL ANDERSON</i></small></h2>
<p class="pr1"><big><b>"Let little Cappen go," they
shouted. "Maybe he can sing
the trolls to sleep—"</b></big></p></div>
<p>The wind came from the
north with sleet on its
back. Raw shuddering gusts
whipped the sea till the ship
lurched and men felt driven
spindrift stinging their
faces. Beyond the rail there
was winter night, a moving
blackness where the waves
rushed and clamored; straining
into the great dark, men
sensed only the bitter salt of
sea-scud, the nettle of sleet
and the lash of wind.</p>
<p>Cappen lost his footing as
the ship heaved beneath him,
his hands were yanked from
the icy rail and he went
stumbling to the deck. The
bilge water was new coldness
on his drenched clothes.
He struggled back to his
feet, leaning on a rower's
bench and wishing miserably
that his quaking stomach
had more to lose. But he had
already chucked his share of
stockfish and hardtack, to
the laughter of Svearek's
men, when the gale started.</p>
<p>Numb fingers groped anxiously
for the harp on his
back. It still seemed intact
in its leather case. He didn't
care about the sodden wadmal
breeks and tunic that
hung around his skin. The
sooner they rotted off him,
the better. The thought of
the silks and linens of Croy
was a sigh in him.</p>
<p>Why had he come to Norren?</p>
<p>A gigantic form, vague in
the whistling dark, loomed
beside him and gave him a
steadying hand. He could
barely hear the blond giant's
bull tones: "Ha, easy there,
lad. Methinks the sea horse
road is too rough for yer
feet."</p>
<p>"Ulp," said Cappen. His
slim body huddled on the
bench, too miserable to care.
The sleet pattered against
his shoulders and the spray
congealed in his red hair.</p>
<p>Torbek of Norren squinted
into the night. It made his
leathery face a mesh of wrinkles.
"A bitter feast Yolner
we hold," he said. "'Twas a
madness of the king's, that
he would guest with his
brother across the water.
Now the other ships are
blown from us and the fire
is drenched out and we lie
alone in the Wolf's Throat."</p>
<p>Wind piped shrill in the
rigging. Cappen could just
see the longboat's single
mast reeling against the sky.
The ice on the shrouds made
it a pale pyramid. Ice everywhere,
thick on the rails and
benches, sheathing the dragon
head and the carved stern-post,
the ship rolling and
staggering under the great
march of waves, men bailing
and bailing in the half-frozen
bilge to keep her afloat, and
too much wind for sail or
oars. Yes—a cold feast!</p>
<p>"But then, Svearek has
been strange since the troll
took his daughter, three
years ago," went on Torbek.
He shivered in a way the
winter had not caused.
"Never does he smile, and his
once open hand grasps tight
about the silver and his men
have poor reward and no
thanks. Yes, strange—" His
small frost-blue eyes shifted
to Cappen Varra, and the unspoken
thought ran on
beneath them: Strange, even,
that he likes you, the wandering
bard from the south.
Strange, that he will have
you in his hall when you
cannot sing as his men would
like.</p>
<p>Cappen did not care to
defend himself. He had
drifted up toward the northern
barbarians with the idea
that they would well reward
a minstrel who could offer
them something more than
their own crude chants. It
had been a mistake; they
didn't care for roundels or
sestinas, they yawned at the
thought of roses white and
red under the moon of Caronne,
a moon less fair than
my lady's eyes. Nor did a
man of Croy have the size
and strength to compel their
respect; Cappen's light blade
flickered swiftly enough so
that no one cared to fight
him, but he lacked the power
of sheer bulk. Svearek alone
had enjoyed hearing him
sing, but he was niggardly
and his brawling thorp was
an endless boredom to a man
used to the courts of southern
princes.</p>
<p>If he had but had the manhood
to leave— But he had
delayed, because of a lusty
peasant wench and a hope
that Svearek's coffers would
open wider; and now he was
dragged along over the
Wolf's Throat to a midwinter
feast which would have
to be celebrated on the sea.</p>
<p>"Had we but fire—" Torbek
thrust his hands inside
his cloak, trying to warm
them a little. The ship rolled
till she was almost on her
beam ends; Torbek braced
himself with practiced feet,
but Cappen went into the
bilge again.</p>
<p>He sprawled there for a
while, his bruised body refusing
movement. A weary
sailor with a bucket glared
at him through dripping
hair. His shout was dim
under the hoot and skirl of
wind: "If ye like it so well
down here, then help us
bail!"</p>
<p>"'Tis not yet my turn,"
groaned Cappen, and got
slowly up.</p>
<p>The wave which had nearly
swamped them had put out
the ship's fire and drenched
the wood beyond hope of
lighting a new one. It was
cold fish and sea-sodden
hardtack till they saw land
again—if they ever did.</p>
<p>As Cappen raised himself
on the leeward side, he
thought he saw something
gleam, far out across the
wrathful night. A wavering
red spark— He brushed a
stiffened hand across his
eyes, wondering if the madness
of wind and water had
struck through into his own
skull. A gust of sleet hid it
again. But—</p>
<p>He fumbled his way aft
between the benches. Huddled
figures cursed him
wearily as he stepped on
them. The ship shook herself,
rolled along the edge of
a boiling black trough, and
slid down into it; for an instant,
the white teeth of
combers grinned above her
rail, and Cappen waited for
an end to all things. Then
she mounted them again,
somehow, and wallowed toward
another valley.</p>
<p>King Svearek had the
steering oar and was trying
to hold the longboat into the
wind. He had stood there
since sundown, huge and
untiring, legs braced and the
bucking wood cradled in his
arms. More than human he
seemed, there under the icicle
loom of the stern-post,
his gray hair and beard rigid
with ice. Beneath the
horned helmet, the strong
moody face turned right and
left, peering into the darkness.
Cappen felt smaller
than usual when he approached
the steersman.</p>
<p>He leaned close to the
king, shouting against the
blast of winter: "My lord,
did I not see firelight?"</p>
<p>"Aye. I spied it an hour
ago," grunted the king.
"Been trying to steer us a
little closer to it."</p>
<p>Cappen nodded, too sick
and weary to feel reproved.
"What is it?"</p>
<p>"Some island—there are
many in this stretch of water—now
shut up!"</p>
<p>Cappen crouched down
under the rail and waited.</p>
<p>The lonely red gleam
seemed nearer when he
looked again. Svearek's
tones were lifting in a roar
that hammered through the
gale from end to end of the
ship: "Hither! Come hither
to me, all men not working!"</p>
<p>Slowly, they groped to
him, great shadowy forms in
wool and leather, bulking
over Cappen like storm-gods.
Svearek nodded toward the
flickering glow. "One of the
islands, somebody must be
living there. I cannot bring
the ship closer for fear of
surf, but one of ye should be
able to take the boat thither
and fetch us fire and dry
wood. Who will go?"</p>
<p>They peered overside, and
the uneasy movement that
ran among them came from
more than the roll and pitch
of the deck underfoot.</p>
<p>Beorna the Bold spoke at
last, it was hardly to be heard
in the noisy dark: "I never
knew of men living hereabouts.
It must be a lair of
trolls."</p>
<p>"Aye, so ... aye, they'd but
eat the man we sent ... out
oars, let's away from here
though it cost our lives ..."
The frightened mumble was
low under the jeering wind.</p>
<p>Svearek's face drew into a
snarl. "Are ye men or puling
babes? Hack yer way
through them, if they be
trolls, but bring me fire!"</p>
<p>"Even a she-troll is stronger
than fifty men, my king,"
cried Torbek. "Well ye know
that, when the monster woman
broke through our guards
three years ago and bore off
Hildigund."</p>
<p>"Enough!" It was a scream
in Svearek's throat. "I'll have
yer craven heads for this, all
of ye, if ye gang not to the
isle!"</p>
<p>They looked at each other,
the big men of Norren, and
their shoulders hunched bear-like.
It was Beorna who
spoke it for them: "No, that
ye will not. We are free
housecarls, who will fight for
a leader—but not for a madman."</p>
<p>Cappen drew back against
the rail, trying to make himself
small.</p>
<p>"All gods turn their faces
from ye!" It was more than
weariness and despair which
glared in Svearek's eyes,
there was something of death
in them. "I'll go myself,
then!"</p>
<p>"No, my king. That we will
not find ourselves in."</p>
<p>"I am the king!"</p>
<p>"And we are yer housecarls,
sworn to defend ye—even
from yerself. Ye shall
not go."</p>
<p>The ship rolled again, so
violently that they were all
thrown to starboard. Cappen
landed on Torbek, who
reached up to shove him aside
and then closed one huge fist
on his tunic.</p>
<p>"Here's our man!"</p>
<p>"Hi!" yelled Cappen.</p>
<p>Torbek hauled him roughly
back to his feet. "Ye cannot
row or bail yer fair
share," he growled, "nor do
ye know the rigging or any
skill of a sailor—'tis time ye
made yerself useful!"</p>
<p>"Aye, aye—let little Cappen
go—mayhap he can sing
the trolls to sleep—" The
laughter was hard and barking,
edged with fear, and
they all hemmed him in.</p>
<p>"My lord!" bleated the
minstrel. "I am your
guest—"</p>
<p>Svearek laughed unpleasantly,
half crazily. "Sing
them a song," he howled.
"Make a fine roun—whatever
ye call it—to the troll-wife's
beauty. And bring us
some fire, little man, bring
us a flame less hot than the
love in yer breast for yer
lady!"</p>
<p>Teeth grinned through
matted beards. Someone
hauled on the rope from
which the ship's small boat
trailed, dragging it close.
"Go, ye scut!" A horny hand
sent Cappen stumbling to the
rail.</p>
<p>He cried out once again.
An ax lifted above his head.
Someone handed him his own
slim sword, and for a wild
moment he thought of fighting.
Useless—too many of
them. He buckled on the
sword and spat at the men.
The wind tossed it back in
his face, and they raved with
laughter.</p>
<p>Over the side! The boat
rose to meet him, he landed
in a heap on drenched planks
and looked up into the shadowy
faces of the northmen.
There was a sob in his throat
as he found the seat and took
out the oars.</p>
<p>An awkward pull sent him
spinning from the ship, and
then the night had swallowed
it and he was alone. Numbly,
he bent to the task. Unless he
wanted to drown, there was
no place to go but the island.</p>
<p>He was too weary and ill
to be much afraid, and such
fear as he had was all of the
sea. It could rise over him,
gulp him down, the gray
horses would gallop over him
and the long weeds would
wrap him when he rolled
dead against some skerry.
The soft vales of Caronne
and the roses in Croy's gardens
seemed like a dream.
There was only the roar and
boom of the northern sea,
hiss of sleet and spindrift,
crazed scream of wind, he
was alone as man had ever
been and he would go down
to the sharks alone.</p>
<p>The boat wallowed, but
rode the waves better than
the longship. He grew dully
aware that the storm was
pushing him toward the
island. It was becoming visible,
a deeper blackness harsh
against the night.</p>
<p>He could not row much in
the restless water, he shipped
the oars and waited for the
gale to capsize him and fill
his mouth with the sea. And
when it gurgled in his throat,
what would his last thought
be? Should he dwell on the
lovely image of Ydris in
Seilles, she of the long bright
hair and the singing voice?
But then there had been the
tomboy laughter of dark
Falkny, he could not neglect
her. And there were memories
of Elvanna in her castle
by the lake, and Sirann of
the Hundred Rings, and
beauteous Vardry, and hawk-proud
Lona, and— No, he
could not do justice to any
of them in the little time
that remained. What a pity
it was!</p>
<p>No, wait, that unforgettable
night in Nienne, the beauty
which had whispered in his
ear and drawn him close, the
hair which had fallen like a
silken tent about his
cheeks ... ah, that had been
the summit of his life, he
would go down into darkness
with her name on his
lips ... But hell! What <i>had</i>
her name been, now?</p>
<p>Cappen Varra, minstrel of
Croy, clung to the bench and
sighed.</p>
<p>The great hollow voice of
surf lifted about him, waves
sheeted across the gunwale
and the boat danced in madness.
Cappen groaned, huddling
into the circle of his
own arms and shaking with
cold. Swiftly, now, the end
of all sunlight and laughter,
the dark and lonely road
which all men must tread.
<i>O Ilwarra of Syr, Aedra in
Tholis, could I but kiss you
once more—</i></p>
<p>Stones grated under the
keel. It was a shock like a
sword going through him.
Cappen looked unbelievingly
up. The boat had drifted
to land—he was alive!</p>
<p>It was like the sun in his
breast. Weariness fell from
him, and he leaped overside,
not feeling the chill of the
shallows. With a grunt, he
heaved the boat up on the
narrow strand and knotted
the painter to a fang-like jut
of reef.</p>
<p>Then he looked about him.
The island was small, utterly
bare, a savage loom of rock
rising out of the sea that
growled at its feet and
streamed off its shoulders.
He had come into a little
cliff-walled bay, somewhat
sheltered from the wind. He
was here!</p>
<p>For a moment he stood,
running through all he had
learned about the trolls which
infested these northlands.
Hideous and soulless dwellers
underground, they knew
not old age; a sword could
hew them asunder, but before
it reached their deep-seated
life, their unhuman strength
had plucked a man apart.
Then they ate him—</p>
<p>Small wonder the northmen
feared them. Cappen
threw back his head and
laughed. He had once done a
service for a mighty wizard
in the south, and his reward
hung about his neck, a small
silver amulet. The wizard
had told him that no supernatural
being could harm
anyone who carried a piece of
silver.</p>
<p>The northmen said that a
troll was powerless against
a man who was not afraid;
but, of course, only to see
one was to feel the heart turn
to ice. They did not know
the value of silver, it seemed—odd
that they shouldn't,
but they did not. Because
Cappen Varra did, he had no
reason to be afraid; therefore
he was doubly safe, and
it was but a matter of talking
the troll into giving him
some fire. If indeed there
was a troll here, and not some
harmless fisherman.</p>
<p>He whistled gaily, wrung
some of the water from his
cloak and ruddy hair, and
started along the beach. In
the sleety gloom, he could
just see a hewn-out path
winding up one of the cliffs
and he set his feet on it.</p>
<p>At the top of the path, the
wind ripped his whistling
from his lips. He hunched
his back against it and
walked faster, swearing as he
stumbled on hidden rocks.
The ice-sheathed ground was
slippery underfoot, and the
cold bit like a knife.</p>
<p>Rounding a crag, he saw
redness glow in the face of
a steep bluff. A cave mouth,
a fire within—he hastened
his steps, hungering for
warmth, until he stood in
the entrance.</p>
<p>"<i>Who comes?</i>"</p>
<p>It was a hoarse bass cry
that rang and boomed between
walls of rock; there
was ice and horror in it, for
a moment Cappen's heart
stumbled. Then he remembered
the amulet and strode
boldly inside.</p>
<p>"Good evening, mother,"
he said cheerily.</p>
<p>The cave widened out into
a stony hugeness that gaped
with tunnels leading further
underground. The
rough, soot-blackened walls
were hung with plundered
silks and cloth-of-gold, gone
ragged with age and damp;
the floor was strewn with
stinking rushes, and gnawed
bones were heaped in disorder.
Cappen saw the skulls
of men among them. In the
center of the room, a great
fire leaped and blazed, throwing
billows of heat against
him; some of its smoke went
up a hole in the roof, the rest
stung his eyes to watering
and he sneezed.</p>
<p>The troll-wife crouched on
the floor, snarling at him.
She was quite the most hideous
thing Cappen had ever
seen: nearly as tall as he, she
was twice as broad and thick,
and the knotted arms hung
down past bowed knees till
their clawed fingers brushed
the ground. Her head was
beast-like, almost split in
half by the tusked mouth,
the eyes wells of darkness,
the nose an ell long; her
hairless skin was green and
cold, moving on her bones. A
tattered shift covered some
of her monstrousness, but she
was still a nightmare.</p>
<p>"Ho-ho, ho-ho!" Her laughter
roared out, hungry and
hollow as the surf around the
island. Slowly, she shuffled
closer. "So my dinner comes
walking in to greet me, ho,
ho, ho! Welcome, sweet
flesh, welcome, good marrow-filled
bones, come in
and be warmed."</p>
<p>"Why, thank you, good
mother." Cappen shucked his
cloak and grinning at her
through the smoke. He felt
his clothes steaming already.
"I love you too."</p>
<p>Over her shoulder, he
suddenly saw the girl. She
was huddled in a corner,
wrapped in fear, but the eyes
that watched him were as
blue as the skies over
Caronne. The ragged dress
did not hide the gentle
curves of her body, nor did
the tear-streaked grime spoil
the lilt of her face. "Why,
'tis springtime in here," cried
Cappen, "and Primavera herself
is strewing flowers of
love."</p>
<p>"What are you talking
about, crazy man?" rumbled
the troll-wife. She turned to
the girl. "Heap the fire,
Hildigund, and set up the
roasting spit. Tonight I
feast!"</p>
<p>"Truly I see heaven in female
form before me," said
Cappen.</p>
<p>The troll scratched her
misshapen head.</p>
<p>"You must surely be from
far away, moonstruck man,"
she said.</p>
<p>"Aye, from golden Croy
am I wandered, drawn over
dolorous seas and empty
wild lands by the fame of
loveliness waiting here; and
now that I have seen you,
my life is full." Cappen was
looking at the girl as he
spoke, but he hoped the troll
might take it as aimed her
way.</p>
<p>"It will be fuller," grinned
the monster. "Stuffed with
hot coals while yet you live."
She glanced back at the girl.
"What, are you not working
yet, you lazy tub of lard?
Set up the spit, I said!"</p>
<p>The girl shuddered back
against a heap of wood.
"No," she whispered. "I cannot—not
... not for a man."</p>
<p>"Can and will, my girl,"
said the troll, picking up a
bone to throw at her. The girl
shrieked a little.</p>
<p>"No, no, sweet mother. I
would not be so ungallant as
to have beauty toil for me."
Cappen plucked at the troll's
filthy dress. "It is not
meet—in two senses. I only
came to beg a little fire; yet
will I bear away a greater
fire within my heart."</p>
<p>"Fire in your guts, you
mean! No man ever left me
save as picked bones."</p>
<p>Cappen thought he heard
a worried note in the animal
growl. "Shall we have music
for the feast?" he asked
mildly. He unslung the case
of his harp and took it out.</p>
<p>The troll-wife waved her
fists in the air and danced
with rage. "Are you mad? I
tell you, you are going to be
eaten!"</p>
<p>The minstrel plucked a
string on his harp. "This wet
air has played the devil with
her tone," he murmured
sadly.</p>
<p>The troll-wife roared wordlessly
and lunged at him.
Hildigund covered her
eyes. Cappen tuned his harp.
A foot from his throat, the
claws stopped.</p>
<p>"Pray do not excite yourself,
mother," said the bard.
"I carry silver, you know."</p>
<p>"What is that to me? If
you think you have a charm
which will turn me, know
that there is none. I've no
fear of your metal!"</p>
<p>Cappen threw back his
head and sang:</p>
<div class="poem">
<span class="i0">"A lovely lady full oft lies.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">The light that lies within her eyes<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And lies and lies, in no surprise.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">All her unkindness can devise<br/></span>
<span class="i0">To trouble hearts that seek the prize<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Which is herself, are angel lies—"<br/></span>
</div>
<p>"<i>Aaaarrrgh!</i>" It was like
thunder drowning him out.
The troll-wife turned and
went on all fours and poked
up the fire with her nose.</p>
<p>Cappen stepped softly
around her and touched the
girl. She looked up with a
little whimper.</p>
<p>"You are Svearek's only
daughter, are you not?" he
whispered.</p>
<p>"Aye—" She bowed her
head, a strengthless despair
weighting it down. "The
troll stole me away three
winters agone. It has tickled
her to have a princess for
slave—but soon I will roast
on her spit, even as ye, brave
man—"</p>
<p>"Ridiculous. So fair a lady
is meant for another kind
of, um, never mind! Has she
treated you very ill?"</p>
<p>"She beats me now and
again—and I have been so
lonely, naught here at all save
the troll-wife and I—" The
small work-roughened hands
clutched desperately at his
waist, and she buried her
face against his breast.</p>
<p>"Can ye save us?" she
gasped. "I fear 'tis for
naught ye ventured yer life,
bravest of men. I fear we'll
soon both sputter on the
coals."</p>
<p>Cappen said nothing. If
she wanted to think he had
come especially to rescue
her, he would not be so ungallant
to tell her otherwise.</p>
<p>The troll-wife's mouth
gashed in a grin as she
walked through the fire to
him. "There is a price," she
said. "If you cannot tell me
three things about myself
which are true beyond disproving,
not courage nor
amulet nor the gods themselves
may avail to keep that
red head on your shoulders."</p>
<p>Cappen clapped a hand to
his sword. "Why, gladly," he
said; this was a rule of magic
he had learned long ago, that
three truths were the needful
armor to make any guardian
charm work. "Imprimis,
yours is the ugliest nose I
ever saw poking up a fire.
Secundus, I was never in a
house I cared less to guest
at. Tertius, ever among trolls
you are little liked, being
one of the worst."</p>
<p>Hildigund moaned with
terror as the monster swelled
in rage. But there was no
movement. Only the leaping
flames and the eddying
smoke stirred.</p>
<p>Cappen's voice rang out,
coldly: "Now the king lies
on the sea, frozen and wet,
and I am come to fetch a
brand for his fire. And I had
best also see his daughter
home."</p>
<p>The troll shook her head,
suddenly chuckling. "No.
The brand you may have,
just to get you out of this
cave, foulness; but the woman
is in my thrall until a man
sleeps with her—here—for a
night. And if he does, I may
have him to break my fast in
the morning!"</p>
<p>Cappen yawned mightily.
"Thank you, mother. Your
offer of a bed is most welcome
to these tired bones,
and I accept gratefully."</p>
<p>"You will die tomorrow!"
she raved. The ground shook
under the huge weight of her
as she stamped. "Because of
the three truths, I must let
you go tonight; but tomorrow
I may do what I will!"</p>
<p>"Forget not my little
friend, mother," said Cappen,
and touched the cord of
the amulet.</p>
<p>"I tell you, silver has no
use against me—"</p>
<p>Cappen sprawled on the
floor and rippled fingers
across his harp. "<i>A lovely
lady full oft lies—</i>"</p>
<p>The troll-wife turned from
him in a rage. Hildigund
ladled up some broth, saying
nothing, and Cappen ate it
with pleasure, though it could
have used more seasoning.</p>
<p>After that he indited a sonnet
to the princess, who regarded
him wide-eyed. The
troll came back from a tunnel
after he finished, and said
curtly: "This way." Cappen
took the girl's hand and followed
her into a pitchy, reeking
dark.</p>
<p>She plucked an arras aside
to show a room which surprised
him by being hung
with tapestries, lit with candles,
and furnished with a
fine broad featherbed. "Sleep
here tonight, if you dare,"
she growled. "And tomorrow
I shall eat you—and you,
worthless lazy she-trash, will
have the hide flayed off your
back!" She barked a laugh
and left them.</p>
<p>Hildigund fell weeping on
the mattress. Cappen let her
cry herself out while he undressed
and got between the
blankets. Drawing his sword,
he laid it carefully in the
middle of the bed.</p>
<p>The girl looked at him
through jumbled fair locks.
"How can ye dare?" she
whispered. "One breath of
fear, one moment's doubt, and
the troll is free to rend ye."</p>
<p>"Exactly." Cappen yawned.
"Doubtless she hopes that
fear will come to me lying
wakeful in the night. Wherefore
'tis but a question of going
gently to sleep. O Svearek,
Torbek, and Beorna,
could you but see how I am
resting now!"</p>
<p>"But ... the three truths ye
gave her ... how knew ye...?"</p>
<p>"Oh, those. Well, see you,
sweet lady, Primus and Secundus
were my own thoughts,
and who is to disprove them?
Tertius was also clear, since
you said there had been no
company here in three
years—yet are there many
trolls in these lands, ergo
even they cannot stomach our
gentle hostess." Cappen
watched her through heavy-lidded
eyes.</p>
<p>She flushed deeply, blew
out the candles, and he heard
her slip off her garment and
get in with him. There was a
long silence.</p>
<p>Then: "Are ye not—"</p>
<p>"Yes, fair one?" he muttered
through his drowsiness.</p>
<p>"Are ye not ... well, I am
here and ye are here and—"</p>
<p>"Fear not," he said. "I laid
my sword between us. Sleep
in peace."</p>
<p>"I ... would be glad—ye
have come to deliver—"</p>
<p>"No, fair lady. No man of
gentle breeding could so
abuse his power. Goodnight."
He leaned over, brushing his
lips gently across hers, and
lay down again.</p>
<p>"Ye are ... I never thought
man could be so noble," she
whispered.</p>
<p>Cappen mumbled something.
As his soul spun into
sleep, he chuckled. Those unresting
days and nights on
the sea had not left him fit
for that kind of exercise.
But, of course, if she wanted
to think he was being magnanimous,
it could be useful
later—</p>
<hr/>
<p>He woke with a start and
looked into the sputtering
glare of a torch. Its light
wove across the crags and
gullies of the troll-wife's
face and shimmered wetly
off the great tusks in her
mouth.</p>
<p>"Good morning, mother,"
said Cappen politely.</p>
<p>Hildigund thrust back a
scream.</p>
<p>"Come and be eaten," said
the troll-wife.</p>
<p>"No, thank you," said Cappen,
regretfully but firmly.
"'Twould be ill for my
health. No, I will but trouble
you for a firebrand and then
the princess and I will be
off."</p>
<p>"If you think that stupid
bit of silver will protect you,
think again," she snapped.
"Your three sentences were
all that saved you last night.
Now I hunger."</p>
<p>"Silver," said Cappen didactically,
"is a certain shield
against all black magics. So
the wizard told me, and he
was such a nice white-bearded
old man I am sure even
his attendant devils never
lied. Now please depart,
mother, for modesty forbids
me to dress before your
eyes."</p>
<p>The hideous face thrust
close to his. He smiled dreamily
and tweaked her nose—hard.</p>
<p>She howled and flung the
torch at him. Cappen caught
it and stuffed it into her
mouth. She choked and ran
from the room.</p>
<p>"A new sport—trollbaiting,"
said the bard gaily into
the sudden darkness. "Come,
shall we not venture out?"</p>
<p>The girl trembled too much
to move. He comforted her,
absentmindedly, and dressed
in the dark, swearing at the
clumsy leggings. When he
left, Hildigund put on her
clothes and hurried after him.</p>
<p>The troll-wife squatted by
the fire and glared at them as
they went by. Cappen hefted
his sword and looked at her.
"I do not love you," he said
mildly, and hewed out.</p>
<p>She backed away, shrieking
as he slashed at her. In the
end, she crouched at the
mouth of a tunnel, raging futilely.
Cappen pricked her
with his blade.</p>
<p>"It is not worth my time to
follow you down underground,"
he said, "but if ever
you trouble men again, I will
hear of it and come and feed
you to my dogs. A piece at a
time—a very small piece—do
you understand?"</p>
<p>She snarled at him.</p>
<p>"An <i>extremely</i> small
piece," said Cappen amiably.
"Have you heard me?"</p>
<p>Something broke in her.
"Yes," she whimpered. He let
her go, and she scuttled
from him like a rat.</p>
<p>He remembered the firewood
and took an armful; on
the way, he thoughtfully
picked up a few jeweled
rings which he didn't think
she would be needing and
stuck them in his pouch.
Then he led the girl outside.</p>
<p>The wind had laid itself,
a clear frosty morning glittered
on the sea and the
longship was a distant sliver
against white-capped blueness.
The minstrel groaned.
"What a distance to row!
Oh, well—"</p>
<hr/>
<p>They were at sea before
Hildigund spoke. Awe was in
the eyes that watched him.
"No man could be so brave,"
she murmured. "Are ye a
god?"</p>
<p>"Not quite," said Cappen.
"No, most beautiful one, modesty
grips my tongue. 'Twas
but that I had the silver and
was therefore proof against
her sorcery."</p>
<p>"But the silver was no
help!" she cried.</p>
<p>Cappen's oar caught a crab.
"What?" he yelled.</p>
<p>"No—no—why, she told
ye so her own self—"</p>
<p>"I thought she lied. I <i>know</i>
the silver guards against—"</p>
<p>"But she used no magic!
Trolls have but their own
strength!"</p>
<p>Cappen sagged in his seat.
For a moment he thought he
was going to faint. Then only
his lack of fear had armored
him; and if he had known the
truth, that would not have
lasted a minute.</p>
<p>He laughed shakily. Another
score for his doubts about
the overall value of truth!</p>
<p>The longship's oars bit water
and approached him. Indignant
voices asking why he
had been so long on his errand
faded when his passenger
was seen. And Svearek
the king wept as he took his
daughter back into his arms.</p>
<p>The hard brown face was
still blurred with tears when
he looked at the minstrel, but
the return of his old self was
there too. "What ye have
done, Cappen Varra of Croy,
is what no other man in the
world could have done."</p>
<p>"Aye—aye—" The rough
northern voices held adoration
as the warriors crowded
around the slim red-haired
figure.</p>
<p>"Ye shall have her whom ye
saved to wife," said Svearek,
"and when I die ye shall rule
all Norren."</p>
<p>Cappen swayed and
clutched the rail.</p>
<p>Three nights later he
slipped away from their
shore camp and turned his
face southward.</p>
<div class="trn"><b>Transcriber's Note:</b>
This etext was produced from <i>Fantastic Universe</i> January 1957.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
typographical errors have been corrected without note.</div>

</body>
</html>
